---
layout : default
title : Freedom in Music
author : Barry R. Morse
date : 2017-08-12
excerpt_separator: <!--excerpt-->
---

Freedom in all its forms, whether it be political freedom, freedom of thought, freedom to travel, freedom of religion, freedom from religion, freedom of speech, etc., all enshrined in the Bill of Rights for which I am eternally grateful, has long been my main credo. As a musician, then, I also seek freedom in music. Where does this freedom lie? As a trumpet student I was encouraged to “put something of yourself” into the music. I would start to play the concerto, but then my teacher would stop me and say I wasn’t playing the ornaments in the correct style for that century, or I was using too much vibrato<!--excerpt-->, or I was moving around too much and it’s too distracting. But I was still supposed to be an individual and “make the music my own.” ARGGH! Very frustrating. That kind of subtlety was too much for me. Of course in band and orchestra if I was a fraction of a beat before or after the conductor’s ictus he would stop the rehearsal to squelch the imperfection before it could spread. The rebellion was put down. One band director wouldn’t even let me cross my ankles to keep my feet from audibly tapping. I thought I was doing him a favor. He said it didn’t look good. Soon after I quit playing in ensembles with dictators---I mean, directors. (Sorry!)  


I am fully appreciative of the precision necessary to bring fine music performances to bear. I am often impressed and even overwhelmed by the sonic mastery many players have brought to their instruments and ensembles. We need orchestras to continue to keep alive the rich musical heritage we have inherited at high levels of artistic expectation. I just don’t want to be a part of that anymore. I love sounds. Weird sounds. Beautiful sounds and offensive sounds. I want to be free to make a sound----any sound I feel like and the freedom to try to turn that sound into what I call music. This is now my challenge. 


Some would say that a director who insists on perfecting the written note is ipso facto necessarily a tyrant. A tyrant imposes his/her values on other people. Orchestras and school bands, on the other hand, are collaborative operations. The musicians are there by choice and only through strict artistic discipline on both parties do we have the beautiful performances that I love to listen to. Many musicians love to perform under a wonderful conductor and conductors usually respect and admire the performers who allow him/her to the opportunity to conduct at a high level of musicianship. Ensembles are symbiotic organisms that thrive in free societies. 


That said, I think that our musical education system, of which music directors are a part, promotes a mentality that filters for standardized notated music from composers and requires musicians to learn to play their instruments only in relation to notated symbols on paper. Limited rehearsal time in professional orchestras and unadventurous college band directors avoid programming new works that are at all improvisational. (Yes, there are exceptions). Usually these kinds of compositions require conductors to relearn how to conduct as new techniques and textures are not always amenable to the old ways of conducting. Thus, freedom in music is locked out, segregated, banished to the musical outlands. No problem say most conventional educators and performers: There is plenty of great new music being written in standard forms and notations that don’t require performers to break free of the written page. And this is exactly the positive feedback loop that discourages much new free music from being composed, encourages more of the same structured compositional forms, keeps the public indoctrinated with the expectation that good band and orchestra music is always played in tempo with everyone together under the human metronome standing at the front and which keeps players developmentally stunted: many very fine classically trained musicians are scared to death to make a sound unless it is notated on a page in front of them.  Jazz is improvised music and does not submit itself to a conductor, but even jazz musicians are chained by one foot to the chord changes. 


Composer Vinko Globokar once told me that yes, indeed, there are no rules anymore. Anything goes. There is no longer any way (if there ever was) of determining musical “quality” (whatever that means!). The music is “good” if it realizes the composer/performer’s intent. So why are so many composers, performers and listeners still so obsessed with music that is played in tempo, in tune and starting and stopping together? It is as if the prison gates are wide open with no guards in sight and the innocent prisoners, victims of a restrictive musical education, choose to stay safely in their cells.


I am not advocating musical anarchy. Anarchy is the lack of responsibility. With freedom comes responsibility. A free improviser must at times subsume his/her personality and expression for a better group outcome. An improviser still has the same responsibility as a classically trained musician for musical integrity: the performer has to really endeavor to provide a performance that he/she truly believes in. We are not just making noise, but sometimes, noise that is “musical” (whatever that means to you).


Finally, I would like to express my interest and what I feel is a need to educate educators, young players, older players and the general public about free music: the allure of new timbres, the excitement of unpredictable forms, and the sheer fun of interacting with other people, sometimes from other cultures and musical backgrounds, in collaborative, non-judgmental and wholly satisfying musical conversations. Like how we live (or should) in free societies. 
